# Tracing Whitepaper

There is an immediate need for health and government officials across the country to have access to high quality contact tracing data, and a variety of different mechanisms that this data can be collected. Several trade offs exist between accuracy and privacy, and need to be analyzed to create an optimal solution between accurate, verifiable data and wide spread consumer adoption to reach the critical mass required to inform policy changes during the COVID-19 crisis. 

Below we are going to analyze the different mechanisms in which cellular technology can be used for reliable contact tracing while still keeping the public's privacy intact using the frameworks in place by the Office of the Privacy Commissioner in Canada, instilling the confidence required in users that their data can’t be used for anything other than minimizing the spread of COVID-19. The three main categories we will get into are: how to collect and store the data, how and when users should be informed when it is believed they may have come into contact with someone who is COVID-19 positive, and how it is possible to verify users are COVID-19 positive without collecting identity based identifiersndicators on identity.

### How to Collect and Store the Data

**On data collection** - There are two mechanisms in which data can be collected and transformed back into COVID-19 contact tracing: geolocation and bluetooth. Geolocation would track the user when their cell phone is on and location sharing is turned on, creating a map and timestamps of where they went. If the user happened to be in the same area around the same time as any of the verified COVID-19 positive devices were, they could then be notified that they may be at risk. This has major privacy implications. In order for the data to be useful, the location history would need to be as precise as possible. This would make it relatively easy to determine a users home address, and remove the ability for the data to be truly anonymized. Geolocation can be stripped back to large areas only for more privacy, but that would come at the cost of the accuracy of the data provided back to health officials, and users in any relatively high population density area would be bombarded with risk notifications to the point of them getting ignored. Bluetooth on the other hand, would not require specific geolocation data to function, only an anonymized unique identifier created on the device. The bluetooth mechanism would search the immediate area for other bluetooth signals, and upon finding them would create a “handshake” between the two devices that verifies these two devices were in the same area at the same time. In this methodology, you don’t need precise location of the device at any given time, as it creates a relationship table of all of the anonymized identifiers within the devices that have come into contact with each other. This allows health and government officials to accurately determine how many devices any given device has come into contact with, notify the users if they have been in contact with a device that has been verified as COVID-19 positive, and does not reveal sensitive detailed location data that could trace back the identity of the user.

**On data storing** - There are also two mechanisms in which to store the data: centralized servers or locally. Whether using geolocation or bluetooth, transmitting and storing the data in a centralized manner would allow for health officials to get an accurate view at any given time of either where all devices are or have been, mapping all of those users back to infected devices using geolocation, or up to date relationship tables on which devices have come into contact with a COVID-19 positive device. There is a trade off in privacy for this mass dataset, as it would be on all devices, all the time, regardless of if a user has or will ever come into contact with a COVID-19 positive device. Storing the data locally (on a users device, unretrievable without explicit consent of the user) would limit authorities access, and when a user has tested positive for COVID-19, they can then make the conscious decision that their data is critical in tracking the spread of COVID-19, and elect to report it and share their data back in a centralized manner.

### How, when and at what frequency to inform users of cases spreading near them

Broadcasting possible contact to users is vital in stopping the spread early. This needs to be done accurately, as bombarding users with notifications with false positive warnings will lead to all of the notifications being ignored. You could either notify everyone of new cases and the general area, which would require no real accurate information but will be irrelevant the vast majority of the time, notify users who were only in a precise geolocation at the same time as a COVID-19 positive device (accurate if we accept the privacy implications of transmitting accurate location data, only general area specific if we want to keep privacy in tact) or only notify users devices who have had a direct bluetooth “handshake” with the positive device. The further we go along in this list, the less users receive notifications and the more accurate they become. The goal is to only notify the user if they have an immediate health risk, prompting them to either self isolate to flatten the curve or to seek medical attention, so either precise geolocation notification (accepting the privacy implications) or bluetooth “handshake” contact reporting is optimal to prompt the user into immediate action, as over notifying individuals would render the notifications ineffective.

### Verifying Reports

Verification of COVID-19 positive devices is crucial in order to not spoil the data set entirely. False verifications would ping the users with false notifications, and as discussed above would then render all notifications ineffective in prompting users to either self isolate or seek medical attention. The health authority can generate a token by which either a user can enter that token and confirm themselves as a COVID-19 positive device, electing to share their data back to send at risk notifications through any of the mechanisms above if the data is stored locally, or if the data is stored centrally the health officials would transmit the token back into the device, notifying any users of possible contact.

### Conclusion

Given the trade offs between privacy and accuracy listed above, the most accurate mechanism for contact tracing COVID-19 is storing bluetooth handshakes locally, verifying COVID-19 positive devices through a token generated by health officials, and then giving then having the user give explicit consent to transmit their data back in order to notify anyone that they have come in contact with. This minimized data collected only to what is needed to properly contact trace, requires user consent and only notifies people of an immediate health risk, which will have a higher chance of prompting them to either self isolate or seek medical attention.   

### References

1. Ramesh Raskar, MIT (March 19, 2020) _Apps Gone Rogue: Maintaining Personal Privacy in an Epidemic_ <https://arxiv.org/pdf/2003.08567.pdf>
2. Singapore Government Digital Services (April 1, 2020) _Trace together, safer together_ <https://www.tracetogether.gov.sg/>
3. Dilshan Kathriarachchi & Global News (April 2, 2020) _Should Canada use our cell phones to slow the spread of COVID-19?_ <https://omny.fm/shows/wait-theres-more/should-canada-use-our-cell-phones-to-slow-the-spre>
4. WeTrace & AndreasGassmann (March 30, 2020) _Privacy-Preserving Bluetooth Covid-19 Contract Tracing_ <https://wetrace.ch/>, <https://devpost.com/software/wetrace-g9ocyi>
5. Prof. Carmela Troncoso (April 3, 2020) _DP-3T - Decentralized Privacy-Preserving Proximity Tracing_ <https://github.com/DP-3T/documents>
6. Co-Epi (Community Epidemiology In Action) <https://www.coepi.org/>
